---
title: 5. Building and running *eko*
---

*mu* is the core execution environment for the *eko* system and consists of the `mu-runtime` binary,
runtime libraries `libmu.so` and `libmu.a`, and a number of source libraries. `mu-runtime` is a
small driver program that implements a library loader on top of the *libmu* runtime, see *src/mu-runtime*.

###  Runtime Libraries
<hr>
<p></p>
The runtime component is distributed as both a static and shared library.  The `world` target
builds the release version of the runtime and prepares a distribution image that may be installed on
your system with the `install` target.

>        make world
<br/>
The `release`, `debug`, and `profile` targets compile and link the `mu-runtime` binary and `libmu.so` runtime.
`mu-runtime` can run standalone with only the *libmu* symbols available (used mostly for debugging)
or load one or more libraries.

###  Runtime Development
<hr>
<p></p>
The `commit` and `perf` targets run several lint utilities and creates a
`valgrind` profile. It requires the `clang-tidy`, `cppcheck` and `valgrind` utilities.

>        make commit perf
<br/>
The *core* symbols are defined in a self-contained source file, `./eko/eko/core:core.l`, which is
generated by the build system. The stock distribution supplies the most recent `core.l`,
libraries and documentation need to be regenerated only if the you change documentation source.

###  Generating the Documentation
<hr>
<p></p>

<br/>
The `source` target compiles the literate programming system sources to a series of HTML documents
installed in `./src/docs/ix` and a similar collection of library source files installed in the
`./src/core` tree.

<br/>
To generate the libraries and docmentation from source, you will need the `literate` program installed
and found in your path. See *The Ix Programming Environment* foreward for details.

>        make source doc

###  Running the Test Suite
<hr>
<p></p>
The distribution supplies a suite of tests, which are used for validation during development.

<br/>
To run the test suite:

>        make tests

###  Running mu-runtime
<hr>
<p></p>
The `mu-runtime` source is found in `./src/mu-runtime`. `mu-runtime` supplies a simple repl used mostly
for debugging.

<br/>
From the *mu-runtime* help:

>            OVERVIEW: mu-runtime - posix platform mu repl
>            USAGE: mu-runtime [options] [src-file...]
>            
>            OPTIONS:
>              -h                   print this message
>              -v                   print version string
>              -b                   enter break loop
>              -l SRCFILE           load SRCFILE in sequence
>              -e SEXPR             evaluate SEXPR and print result
>              -q SEXPR             evaluate SEXPR quietly
>              src-file...          load source files

<br/>
To run the `mu-exec` repl with *libmu* symbols only:

>            mu-runtime -b

<br/>
To run the `mu-exec` repl with *libmu* and *core* symbols:

>            mu-runtime -l src/core/core.l -b
